---
title: "How to become a data publisher for GBIF.org"
start: true
teaching: 30
exercises: 30
questions:
- "What is a data publisher?"
objectives:
- "Understand what it is to be a data publisher."
keypoints:
- "Use the DOI"
---

# Secure institutional agreements

Once you decide to share data through the GBIF network, you should alert administrators of your plans to publish on behalf of your institution. Sharing open data can increase the visibility and impact of institutions, building on traditional methods like academic publications and specimen loans to reveal new opportunities for collaboration and, through the use of DOI-based citations, link directly to research uses (example).

# Request Endorsement

To become a data publisher, your organization must request endorsement from the GBIF community. Once you have reviewed the data publisher agreement and agree in principle to share data, we encourage you to request endorsement for your organization as soon as possible to avoid delays in publishing data.

# Select publishing tools and partners

Much of the data now shared with GBIF resides on one of the dozens of installations of the GBIF IPT: Integrated Publishing Toolkit and, increasingly, on national installations of the Living Atlases platform originally developed by the Atlas of Living Australia.

Other alternative arrangements exist, including those for data hosting both within and outside a given data-publishing institution. Highly skilled publishers can also use an API to register datasets programmatically (contact the GBIF help desk for more details).

We also maintain a knowledgebase of tools and other documentation.

# Data publisher agreement

https://www.gbif.org/terms/data-publisher

# Data user agreement

https://www.gbif.org/terms/data-user


# Prepare data for publication

Data holders who choose to share their data using Darwin Core Archives (see data standards) can familiarize themselves with the format using spreadsheet templates created for occurrence datasets, checklists and sampling-event datasets.

Data holders have a choice to make regarding their arrangements for hosting data. Some choose to host and maintain instances of the Integrated Publishing Toolkit (IPT, a free, open-source software tool developed by the GBIF Secretariat. However, other alternatives exist, including hosted IPT services available through national and thematic nodes and cloud-based regional services maintained by the Secretariat.

Using the updated GBIF Data Validator, you can check datasets prior to publication and receive specific recommendations on improving and cleaning them. The report will help, for instance, by flagging duplicate records, incomplete fields and recognized inconsistencies in formatting.

You can also prepare datasets to comply with GBIF's data quality requirements.


# Definitions (exercise?)

Definitions
GBIF Participant: Signatory of the GBIF Memorandum of Understanding (MoU).
GBIF Secretariat: Legal entity empowered by the GBIF Participants to enter into contracts, execute the Work Programme, and maintain the central services for the GBIF network including software components and updates, interfaces, indexing and registry services, helpdesk and relevant training.
GBIF network: The infrastructure consisting of the central services of the GBIF Secretariat, Participant Nodes and Data Publishers. Making data available through the GBIF network means registering and advertising the pertinent services via the GBIF central services.
Participant Node: An organisational unit designated by the GBIF Participant to coordinate activities in its domain. It may also provide data.
Biodiversity data: Primary data on specimens, observations, names, taxonomic concepts, and sites, and other data on biological diversity.
Metadata: Data describing the attributes and combinations of biodiversity data.
Data: Biodiversity data and metadata.
Data publishing: The process of and agreements for making data freely and universally available on the Internet.
Data Publisher: A custodian of data making it technically available. This may or may not be the data owner. If not they will have declared to GBIF that they have permission to make the data available.
User: Anyone who uses the Internet to access data through the GBIF network.
Owner of data: The legal entity possessing the right resulting from the act of creating a digital record. The record may be a product derived from another, possibly non-digital product, which may affect the right.
Sensitive data: Any data that the Data Publisher does not want to make available, e.g. precise localities of endangered species.

# Incentives for publishing open-access biodiversity data
An important part of GBIF's mission is to promote a culture in which people recognize the benefits of publishing open-access biodiversity data, for themselves as well as for the broader society.

By making your data discoverable and accessible through GBIF and similar information infrastructures, you will contribute to global knowledge about biodiversity, and thus to the solutions that will promote its conservation and sustainable use.
Data publishing enables datasets held all over the world to be integrated, revealing new opportunities for collaboration among data owners and researchers.
Publishing data enables individuals and institutions to be properly credited for their work to create and curate biodiversity data, by giving visibility to publishing institutions through good metadata authoring. This recognition can be further developed if you author a peer-reviewed data paper, giving scholarly recognition to the publication of biodiversity datasets.
Collection managers can trace usage and citations of digitized data published from their institutions and accessed through GBIF and similar infrastructures.
Some funding agencies now require researchers receiving public funds to make data freely accessible at the end of a project.

https://docs.gbif.org/course-introduction-to-gbif/en/how-to-become-a-data-publisher.html
